# flatpak-builder-lint

flatpak-builder-lint is a linter for Flatpak artifacts like Flatpak
manifests, Flatpak Builder build artifacts and repos. It is primarily
developed for Flathub, but can be useful for general use as well.

## Checks

There are four checks available right now - the `appstream` check, the
`manifest` check, the `builddir` check and the `repo` check. The manifest
and the repo checks are run on Flathub infrastructure.

- The `appstream` check expects path to a [Metainfo file](https://docs.flathub.org/docs/for-app-authors/metainfo-guidelines/#path-and-filename)
  as input. This is a wrapper for `appstreamcli validate` with some
  Flathub specific overrides.
- The `manifest` check expects path to a [Flatpak manifest](https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/manifests.html)
  as input.
- The `builddir` check expects path to a build directory generated by
  Flatpak Builder as input.
- The `repo` check expects path to an OSTree repository exported by
  Flatpak Builder as input.

The last two are created when [building the application](https://docs.flathub.org/docs/for-app-authors/submission#build-and-install)
with the proper arguments to Flatpak Builder.

Some checks may require network connectivity. Sentry integration is used
only if `SENTRY_DSN` environment variable is set.

## Exceptions

Errors can be overridden through exceptions.

Exceptions must be [submitted to Flathub](https://docs.flathub.org/docs/for-app-authors/linter#exceptions)
if the app is meant to be published on Flathub or already exists on
Flathub. These exceptions, once published, can be viewed by doing:

```sh
curl -s https://flathub.org/api/v2/exceptions/my.app.id|jq
```

### Local exceptions

This option should be used sparingly as some errors should never be
ignored and it may hide errors that will fail on Flathub.

For ignoring errors locally (for example in CI outside Flathub),
the `--user-exceptions` argument can be used to point it to a local
JSON file containing exceptions:

```sh
flatpak-builder-lint --exceptions --user-exceptions exceptions.json {manifest,builddir,repo} path
```

The JSON file must be in the following format:

```json
{
    "com.foo.Bar.Devel": [
        "linter-error-1"
    ],
    "com.foo.Bar.Nightly": [
        "linter-error-2"
    ]
}
```

If it is passed only local exceptions loaded from the file, matching the
app ID will be used, otherwise it will use remote exceptions from
Flathub.

## Installation

The only supported ways to install and use are Flatpak and Docker.

### Flatpak

flatpak-builder-lint is part of the `org.flatpak.Builder` flatpak package
available on Flathub. [Set up Flathub][flatpak_setup] first, then install
`org.flatpak.Builder`:

```bash
flatpak install flathub -y org.flatpak.Builder
```

To run the manifest check:

```sh
flatpak run --command=flatpak-builder-lint org.flatpak.Builder manifest com.foo.bar.json
```

To run the repo check:

```sh
flatpak run --command=flatpak-builder-lint org.flatpak.Builder repo repo
```

The Flatpak package tracks the git commit currently used on the Flathub
infrastructure.

### Docker

The latest build of flatpak-builder-linter can be used with Docker.

```bash
docker run --rm -it ghcr.io/flathub/flatpak-builder-lint:latest --help
```

To run the manifest check:

```sh
docker run -v $(pwd):/mnt --rm -it ghcr.io/flathub/flatpak-builder-lint:latest manifest /mnt/com.foo.bar.json
```

To run the repo check:

```sh
docker run -v $(pwd):/mnt --rm -it ghcr.io/flathub/flatpak-builder-lint:latest repo /mnt/repo
```

You may need to pass `:Z` if your distro is using SELinux like so
`-v $(pwd):/mnt:Z`.

### Local environment

Installing flatpak-builder-lint locally with [uv][uv] or pip is
not recommended unless for development purposes. It depends on patches
that are found in the `org.flatpak.Builder` flatpak package
and on external tools.

## Contributing

### Dependencies

The following system dependencies must be installed:

- `libgirepository1.0-dev, gir1.2-ostree-1.0, gir1.2-appstream-1.0`
- `flatpak-builder` for validating flatpak-builder manifests
- `appstreamcli` from `org.flatpak.Builder` for validating MetaInfo files
```sh
#!/bin/sh

exec flatpak run --branch=stable --command=appstreamcli org.flatpak.Builder ${@}
```
- `desktop-file-validate` to validate desktop files
- `git` to check if a directory is a git repository

Debiab/Ubuntu:

```sh
sudo apt install git appstream flatpak-builder libgirepository1.0-dev gir1.2-ostree-1.0 gir1.2-appstream-1.0 libcairo2-dev desktop-file-utils
```

ArchLinux:

```sh
sudo pacman -S --needed git appstream flatpak-builder desktop-file-utils ostree glib2
```

Fedora:

```sh
sudo dnf install git appstream flatpak-builder desktop-file-utils ostree-libs glib2-devel cairo-devel
```

Clone the repo:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/flathub/flatpak-builder-lint.git && cd flatpak-builder-lint
```

Then the project can be run with:

```sh
uv run --all-groups --frozen -q flatpak-builder-lint --help
```

Dependencies can be added to removed with `uv add` and `uv remove` while
`uv lock` will regenerate the lockfile. `uv lock -P` can be used to
upgrade a specific package or `uv lock -U` to upgrade everything.

The following Python dependencies are installed and needed to run the
project: `jsonschema, requests, requests-cache, lxml, sentry-sdk,
ruamel.yaml, publicsuffixlist` and `PyGObject`. Additionally `setuptools`
is necessary to build the project. `dunamai` is used to generate a
version from the git commit, since no tags or releases are done, in
absence of which it will default to the version of the last tag made.

### Formatting and Linting

[Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/installation/) is used to lint and
format code. [MyPy](https://mypy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started.html)
is used to check Python types.

A set of pre-commit hooks are provided to automate the formatting and
linting:

```sh
uv run --frozen -q pre-commit install
```

To uninstall:

```sh
uv run --frozen -q pre-commit uninstall
```

Or run individually:

```sh
uv run --frozen -q ruff format
```

```sh
uv run --frozen -q ruff check --fix --exit-non-zero-on-fix
```

```sh
uv run --frozen -q mypy .
```

### Tests

[Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/getting-started.html) is used
to run tests.

```sh
uv run --frozen -q pytest -vvv
```

An additional Flat manager test can be run when modifying code relying
on the flatmanager check. The test is meant to be run on CI and not
locally. If it is being run locally, it must be run from the root of the
git repository using

```sh
./tests/flatmanager.sh
```

To avoid cleanup run as:

```sh
NO_CLEAN_UP=1 ./tests/flatmanager.sh
```

To write tests for manifest checks, recreate a minimal Flatpak builder
manifest with the cases to check against and put it in `tests/manifests`.
Then add the test using it (or modify the existing tests) in
`tests/test_manifest.py`.

Similarly to add a test for builddir check, recreate the `metadata`,
cataloge, metainfo, desktop files as needed and put them in a
subdirectory of `tests/builddir`. Then add the test in
`tests/test_builddir.py`. There are helper functions in
`tests/test_builddir.py` to emulate a flatpak-builder build directory
using the source files.

Please avoid adding binary files that aren't readable.

### Development environment

A development environment is also available as a docker container. To
use it to run tests or for linting execute the below from the root of the
repository:

```sh
./docker/build.sh
```

This gives an active shell inside the container with all the necessary
tools available and any changes made are available once the container
is exited. The same environment can also be used from the docker images
published to GitHub if rebuilding the latest isn't necessary:

```sh
docker run -it --rm --entrypoint= -v $(pwd):/mnt:Z -w /mnt ghcr.io/flathub-infra/flatpak-builder-lint:latest bash
```

## Usage

```
flatpak-builder-lint

A linter for Flatpak manifests and build artifacts primarily
developed for Flathub

positional arguments:
  {appstream,manifest,builddir,repo}
                        Type of artifact to lint

                          appstream expects a MetaInfo file
                          manifest  expects a flatpak-builder manifest
                          builddir  expects a flatpak-builder build directory
                          repo      expects an OSTree repo exported by flatpak-builder

  PATH                  Path to the artifact

options:
  -h, --help            Show this help message and exit
  --version             Show the version number and exit
  --exceptions          Skip errors added to exceptions. Exceptions must be submitted to Flathub
  --user-exceptions     Path to a JSON file with exceptions
  --appid               Override the app ID with this app ID
  --cwd                 Override the path parameter with the current working directory
  --ref                 Override the primary ref detection with this ref
  --gha-format          Use GitHub Actions annotations in CI
  --janitor-exceptions  Enable reporting of stale exceptions to linter repository
  --debug               Enable debug logging

Please report any issues at https://github.com/flathub-infra/flatpak-builder-lint
```

[uv]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/
[flatpak_setup]: https://flathub.org/setup

## Documentation

A list of errors and warnings and their explanations are available in the
[Flatpak builder lint page](https://docs.flathub.org/docs/for-app-authors/linter).
